---
templateKey: blog-post
title: LINQ
date: 2020-09-18T17:05:10.000Z
featuredpost: true
featuredimage: /img/linq.png
description: LINQ stands for Language Integrated Query, is pronounced "link," and provides a strongly typed and logical syntax for querying data in C#. LINQ is a single syntax for querying many types of data sources.
tags:
  - software development
  - queries
  - linq
  - books
---

This post contains my notes from *Essential LINQ* by Charlie Calvert and Dinesh Kulkarni. Most example code comes directly from the book, and any prose taken from the book is in quotes.

What LINQ is - "The Essence of LINQ"
--

* Integrated - "first class citizen of .NET languages"
  * as opposed to SQL, for example, which is more complicated to write in C# and does not have the benefits of type-checking, syntax highlighting, etc. that LINQ provides
* Unitive - a single syntax for a variety of data sources
* Extensible - LINQ can be extended to work with other languages and data sources
* Declarative - LINQ queries are about **what** the developer wants to do, rather than **how** that is accomplished; i.e. LINQ queries are at a higher level
  * declarative syntax is easier to read, maintain, and scale with added complexity
* Hierarchical - LINQ provides a good visual of data, and its syntax makes it easy to navigate hierarchical relationships
* Composable - LINQ queries can compose and use the results of one another
* Transformative - LINQ query results can be converted into other data sources

Useful Foundational Knowledge
--

**Collection initializers** - not really part of LINQ but useful nevertheless. This line:

```csharp
List<int> list = new List<int)>() { 1, 2, 3 };
```

is the same as these lines:

```csharp
List<int> list = new List<int>();
                 list.Add(1);
                 list.Add(2);
                 list.Add(3);
```

A typical **query expression** in LINQ looks like this:

```csharp
var query = from number in list
            where number < 3
            select number;
```

`from` is always at the beginning of a LINQ query, and the final line in a LINQ query always begins with either `select` or `group`. The `where` keyword tells the compiler which numbers are desired; in this case, those less than 3. LINQ has many operators, but the from-where-select structure is the most commonly used in LINQ queries.

It is important that the `from` clause come first and the `select` clause last in order that the IDE and compiler can provide feedback based on the type of data being queried (which is established in the `from` clause).

**Type inference** means using the keyword `var` to define the query, instead of declaring it as, for example, `IEnumerable<int>`. Type inference is the preferred style in order to enforce strong typing, allow LINQ to take advantage of composability, in addition to several other benefits.

**Anonymous types** - when LINQ queries a collection of objects with the `new` keyword following `select`, an anonymous type is created. This is a simple class containing only the properties being queried. This anonymous type will be the type of the output of the query. It will have an automatically generated `ToString()` method that can format the output when printed. At a more basic level, anonymous types are read-only classes used when an object's type cannot be known at compile time.

**Entity classes** are classes that map directly to a database table. Classes are declared entity classes via the `Table` attribute above the class declaration:

```csharp
[Table(Name = "Customers")]
class Customer
{
    [Column]
    public string attributeOne;
    [Column]
    public int attributeTwo;

    // stuff Customer class does
}
```

**Delegates** declare variables that reference a single method. The delegate type must have the same signature (output type, number of parameters, parameter type(s)) as the method it references. **Generic delegates** are a more flexible form of delegates, where the output and parameter types can be declared later.

**Lambdas** provide a simple syntax for declaring delegates, particularly when working with LINQ. The `=>` found in a lambda expression is generally read as "goes to." A lambda declaration like this:

```csharp
Func<int, int, int> myLambda = (a, b) => (a + b);
```

is roughly equivalent to this delegate declaration:

```csharp
public static int Add(int a, int b)
{
    return a + b;
}

Func<int, int, int> myDelegate = Add;
```

**Concurrency control** is how an application maintains consistency in a database where multiple users may be making changes simultaneously. There are two approaches for this: pessimistic concurrency (ask permission), optimistic concurrency (ask forgiveness). LINQ to SQL relies on optimistic concurrency, as it is far more common.

LINQ Clauses
--

Seven types of clauses exist in LINQ: `from`, `let`, `where`, `orderby`, `join`, `select`, and `group-by`.

These clauses must be called in a specific order. The first line of a LINQ query consists of a `from` clause. The last line of a LINQ query consists of either a `select` clause or a `group-by` clause. The body of the query consists of any combination (including zero) of `from`, `let`, `where`, `orderby`, and/or `join` clauses.

Sometimes a `group-by` clause may appear in the middle of a query. This creates a divide in the query; range variables from one side of the query cannot cross this divide to the other side of the query.

While the `select` clause simply outputs all members of the data source (aside from those filtered out by other clauses in the query), the `group-by` clause does the same thing but avoids repeating elements which share a certain key. For example:

```csharp

List<animal> list = new List<animal> { cat, dog, fish, horse, cat }

var query = from animal in list
            group animal by animal.Type;

foreach (var item in query)
{
    Console.WriteLine(item.Key)
}
```

Now, this code prints "cat" only once, even though there are two cats in the list.

LINQ Nomenclature
--

**computation** or **result sequence** - the result of a LINQ query

**projection** - the part following `select` in a select clause

**range variables** - the variable introduced in a `from` clause, which need not be formally declared since its type is inferred. The range variable in the following query is `word`:

```csharp
var query = from word in list
            select word;
```

A range variable's type *can* be explicitly declared when necessary, but this should be avoided.

LINQ to SQL
--

"LINQ to SQL lets developers access relational data as strongly typed objects by translating LINQ to SQL."

Essentially, LINQ provides a means of accessing SQL from C# (or another language that supports LINQ) and gives the benefits of object-oriented programming and strong typing to SQL queries. Thus, C# developers need not embed their SQL queries in string literals.

One last note
--

* Visual Studio provides the Object Relational Designer, which helps with mapping tables to classes

Thanks for reading! I hope you find this and other articles here at ilyanaDev helpful! Be sure to follow me on Twitter [@ilyanaDev](https://twitter.com/ilyanaDev).
