src/pages/blog/2020-06-22-string-calculator-kata-firsttry.md, before:

---
templateKey: blog-post
title: The String Calculator Kata - First Attempt
date: 2020-06-22T17:05:10.000Z
featuredpost: false
featuredimage: /img/stringcalc1.png
description: I recently completed the String Calculator kata for the first time. I got through three of nine sections in the 30 minutes provided.
tags:
  - software development
  - katas
  - coding
  - string calculator
---

The String Calculator Kata is a great kata for practicing test-driven development. In this kata, you spend 30 minutes trying to complete as many of the 9 sections as possible, but the idea is that you never read ahead - only read the step you're on. You can view the instructions [here](https://github.com/ardalis/kata-catalog/blob/master/katas/String%20Calculator.md).

This attempt, I got through only 3 sections, though I did spend a lot of time googleing C# syntax, since I'm used to Java.

For a more in-depth description of how to get a kata started in C#, check out the start of [my post on the FizzBuzz kata](https://ilyana.dev/blog/2020-06-22-fizzbuzz-kata-PPP/).

To view my code, click [here](https://github.com/ilyanaDev/KataPractice/tree/master/StringCalculator/2020-06-22).

I found this kata to be very helpful, and I will definitely try it again in the future to try to beat my performance from this attempt. Best of luck to you if you decide to try it!

Thanks for reading! I hope you find this and other articles here at ilyanaDev helpful! Be sure to follow me on Twitter [@ilyanaDev](https://twitter.com/ilyanaDev).

Commit message:

interlinking string calculator kata posts

src/pages/blog/2020-06-22-string-calculator-kata-firsttry.md, after:

---
templateKey: blog-post
title: The String Calculator Kata - First Attempt
date: 2020-06-22T17:05:10.000Z
featuredpost: false
featuredimage: /img/stringcalc1.png
description: I recently completed the String Calculator kata for the first time. I got through three of nine sections in the 30 minutes provided.
tags:
  - software development
  - katas
  - coding
  - string calculator
---

The String Calculator Kata is a great kata for practicing test-driven development. In this kata, you spend 30 minutes trying to complete as many of the 9 sections as possible, but the idea is that you never read ahead - only read the step you're on. You can view the instructions [here](https://github.com/ardalis/kata-catalog/blob/master/katas/String%20Calculator.md).

This attempt, I got through only 3 sections, though I did spend a lot of time googleing C# syntax, since I'm used to Java.

For a more in-depth description of how to get a kata started in C#, check out the start of [my post on the FizzBuzz kata](https://ilyana.dev/blog/2020-06-22-fizzbuzz-kata-PPP/).

To view my code, click [here](https://github.com/ilyanaDev/KataPractice/tree/master/StringCalculator/2020-06-22).

I found this kata to be very helpful, and I will definitely try it again in the future to try to beat my performance from this attempt. Best of luck to you if you decide to try it!

Update: I've tried this kata again since this post. To view my most recent attempt, click [here](https://ilyana.dev/blog/2020-07-10-string-calculator-kata-secondtry/).

Thanks for reading! I hope you find this and other articles here at ilyanaDev helpful! Be sure to follow me on Twitter [@ilyanaDev](https://twitter.com/ilyanaDev).
